---
title: 'The buffer problem: why I write on my phone'
date: 2018-01-18T16:18:37.937Z
image: /img/blog/progress_buffering_bar.png
---
Writing, like speaking, is often a form of thinking.

<!--more-->

Ideas don’t live in our brains as words, phrases, and paragraphs: they acquire that shape as we extract them from our mind and bring them out into the world. 

A same idea will be molded differently if I speak it, write it, draw it, or act it out on a stage. 

The context in which this molding happens also greatly affects the output: in conversation, a focused, empathetic listener sustains our intuitions, helping us build them out. 


Since I began writing again, I've been thinking about how different technologies incentivize different kinds of ideas, and I noticed how a lot of my best writing was being typed up on my phone. 

One reason might have to do with the buffer problem. 

In the phase of idea generation, my speed of thinking rarely matches the speed at which I am able to type on a laptop. Fingers race ahead of my mind, and I need to stop and wait for my thinking to catch up. 

"The [buffer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_buffer) is empty" told me Kevin Setter (theoretical physicist + brother in law) when he first described this phenomenon to me. 

That breaks the state of [flow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_(psychology)) which was generated by the dynamic interaction of physical gestures, mental processes, and feedback from the screen. Thinking comes to a halt. 

Typing up an idea on my phone, on the other hand, I am committing words to the screen at a slightly slower pace than the one at which I am generating them, keeping the buffer full and the state of flow intact. 

Compared to laptop writing, it is physically difficult, it even hurts after a while, but that turns out to be a feature, not a bug: besides solving the buffer problem, writing words on my phone –such as this blog post– helps me be concise. 

––

*P.S. I write posts like this one every week, you can sign up to [get these posts via email here](http://fleisure.us6.list-manage2.com/subscribe?u=1b57ff432660d827a9445f307&id=db415544cc)*
